DRIVERS-2415 Implement OIDC SASL mechanism (#1365)
mongodb/specifications: source/auth/auth.rst

The cache entry value MUST be either the ``saltedPassword`` parameter or the
combination of the ``clientKey`` and ``serverKey`` parameters.

Reauthentication
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

On any operation that requires authentication, the server may raise the
error ``ReauthenticationRequired`` (391) if the user's credential has expired.

> Drivers MUST immediately attempt to force a reauthenication on the connection

Reviewer: Should we also be more specific here on what reauthentication exactly entails? Is this the step1/step2 flow (assuming we remove the cached credentials potentially) or is it the full handshake steps with speculative auth? And will we have more prose tests added to test this? The current unified tests are only testing retryability but don't have anything to do with auth specifically.

Author: I updated the language.  I'm not sure of a way to test it that will not result in a race condition, because we need the initial token to succeed, but be "about to expire".

Reviewer: Thanks for the language update and understand the test issue. I'll mark this comment resolved - great work so far!

          authentication and authorization code generation.
        type: string
        optional: true # Req if authorizeEndpoint not present
      clientId:
        description: "Unique client ID for this OIDC client"
        type: string
      clientSecret:
        description: "Secret used when communicating with IDP"
        type: string
        optional: true
      requestScopes:
        description: "Additional scopes to request from IDP"
        type: array<string>
        optional: true

Server will use principalName (n) if provided in clientStep1 to select an appropriate IDP.  This IDP's configuration will be returned in serverStep1 to instruct the client on how to acquire an Access Token.  This Access Token will be used in clientStep2 to complete authentication.  The principalName identified within the Access Token MUST match any provided during clientStep1, or the authentication operation will fail.

.. code:: idl

  OIDCMechanismClientStep2:
      description: "Client's request with signed token"
      strict: false
      fields:
          jwt:
              description: "Compact serialized JWT with signature"
              cpp_name: JWT
              type: string

> The driver MAY, if it has previously acquired a valid Access Token, or has cached the reply from serverStep1, begin their authentication by sending clientStep2 with their initial saslStart request and authenticate in a single round trip.  Similarly, as an authenticated client's token's expirationTime approaches, it should proactively acquire a new Access Token, and it MAY do so with cached IDP details, skipping directly to clientStep2.

Author: This paragraph comes from the server technical design, we need to determine how this applies to drivers as the "client".    I think we should add a stipulation that if the principal name does not change, we can skip to step 2.  That means we'd have to store the serverStep1 response as well to give to the callbacks.

`MongoCredential`_ Properties
`````````````````````````````

username
    MUST NOT be specified.

source
    MUST be "$external". Defaults to ``$external``.

password
    MUST NOT be specified.

mechanism
    MUST be "MONGODB-OIDC"

mechanism_properties
    PRINCIPAL_NAME
        Drivers MUST allow the user to specify a principal name, which
        is required by the server when more than one Identity Provider
        is configured.
    DEVICE_NAME
        Drivers MUST allow the user to specify a name for the device

>         workflow that is one of "aws", "azure", or "gcp".

Reviewer 2: should it be case sensitive?

Author: I used lowercase to be consistent with how it is specified in kms

User Provided Callbacks
```````````````````````

> Drivers MUST allow the user to provide callbacks for token request and

Reviewer 2: what if a callback provided but returns null? I guess it should be exception?

Author: Updated

token refresh.  The token request callback MUST accept the OIDCMechanismServerStep1 structure and return an OIDCRequestTokenResult of
the form:

.. code:: idl

  OIDCRequestTokenResult:
      description: "The result of a token request"
      strict: false
      fields:
          accessToken:
              description: "The OIDC access token"
              type: string
          expiresInSeconds:
              description: "The expiration time in seconds from the current time"
              type: int
              optional: true
          refreshToken:
              description: "The OIDC refresh token"
              type: str
              optional: true

.. code:: typescript

    function onOIDCRequestToken(serverInfo: OIDCMechanismServerStep1): OIDCRequestTokenResult

The optional token refresh callback will accept the IDP information as
well as the cached OIDCRequestTokenResult and return a new OIDCRequestTokenResult.

.. code:: typescript

    function onOIDCRefreshToken(serverInfo: OIDCMechanismServerStep1, tokenResult: OIDCRequestTokenResult): OIDCRequestTokenResult

> If no callbacks are given, the driver MUST enforce that a DEVICE_NAME

Reviewer 2: What should happen if no callback defined and no DEVICE_NAME? Or If device_name is set but no env varaibles set? I guess it should be exception, if so can we define wording?

mechanism_properties is set and one of ("aws", "azure", or "gcp").
The callback mechanism can be used to support both Authentication
Code Workflows or Device workflows that are not explicitly implemented
by drivers.

Supported Device Workflows
``````````````````````````

Drives MUST support device workflows for "aws", "azure", and "gcp", given
by the DEVICE_NAME mechanism property.  In all cases the acquired token
will be given as the ``jwt`` argument in the second client step of the
SASL exchange.

AWS
___

When the DEVICE_NAME mechanism property is set to "aws", the driver MUST

> attempt to read the value given by the ``AWS_WEB_IDENTITY_TOKEN_FILE`` and

Reviewer 2: Can we use the full aws workflow as in aws kms (similar to below approach for gcp and azure)?

Reviewer 2: based on .net aws sdk, in this case we will need to look at `AWS_ROLE_ARN` too (otherwise web-identity workflow will fail) as I know we discsussed we don't want doing it, but if we put this aside, will accessToken provided by let's say ec2/ecs envs work here?

.. code:: idl

  OIDCMechanismClientStep2:
      description: "Client's request with signed token"
      strict: false
      fields:
          jwt:
              description: "Compact serialized JWT with signature"
              cpp_name: JWT
              type: string

The driver MAY, if it has previously acquired a valid Access Token, or has cached the reply from serverStep1, begin their authentication by sending clientStep2 with their initial saslStart request and authenticate in a single round trip.  Similarly, as an authenticated client's token's expirationTime approaches, it should proactively acquire a new Access Token, and it MAY do so with cached IDP details, skipping directly to clientStep2.

`MongoCredential`_ Properties
`````````````````````````````

username
    MUST NOT be specified.

source
    MUST be "$external". Defaults to ``$external``.

password
    MUST NOT be specified.

mechanism
    MUST be "MONGODB-OIDC"

mechanism_properties

>     PRINCIPAL_NAME

Author: My understanding is that mechanism_properties should be specifiable in a url string, and can't be non-string objects.

>     PRINCIPAL_NAME

Reviewer 2: in c# impl mechanism properties are `<string, object>`, so we can put anything here. Yes, it won't work with connection string (for a clear reason), but it will work with ClientSettings.

>     PRINCIPAL_NAME

Author: Updated

        Drivers MUST allow the user to specify a principal name, which
        is required by the server when more than one Identity Provider

>         is configured.

Reviewer 3: It’s a surprise that we expect `PRINCIPAL_NAME` as an auth mechanism property instead of passing it in the username. Is there a specific reason for this? As I understand it, it fulfills the same role as the username, and in particular also matches the role of the username for similar auth mechanisms like Kerberos or LDAP.

Author: I thought it might be misleading to use the `username` field, since the server is actually creating a derived username for this session.

Reviewer 3: I guess the question then is about the semantics of the `username` field, whether it is “This is the identity I am attempting to authenticate as” or “This is the username string that the database uses and reports”. I would maybe still lean towards interpreting it as the former, although I see your point about this differing from the DB username.

Reviewer 4: @sgolemon do you have any feelings on this? I'm vaguely reminded of how during LDAP authentication we map the presented authentication name into a name which the LDAP server will recognize through the UserToDNMapping.

I'm also leaning heavily toward the username in `mongodb://[username:password@]host1` is "This is the identity I am attempting to authenticate as" as Anna said

Reviewer 5: I do have feelings! My assumption was that the principal name hint would and should be the `username`, and not a custom property as that seems like "least surprise" from an end-developer point of view.  It's true that the derived principal name may differ (depending on IDP and MongoDB configurations), but from the application point of view the synthesized principal name is an implementation detail and all we get by placing the hint into mechanism properties and prohibiting the username field is a little confusion about why it's not in the usual spot.

Author: From my understanding of the server technical design and implementation, the principal name is by default the "sub" field of the jwt token, which if the IdP uses pairwise identifier is obfuscated by a [salt](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#PairwiseAlg).

Author: So in that case it feels even less like a user name.

Reviewer 3: @blink1073 On today's initiative sync we briefly touched on this, and the sentiment was to use the username field like we would for LDAP and Kerberos. Unless there are concerns with it that haven't been brought up so far, this shouldn't be an auth mechanism property.

Author: Okay fair, I will update the spec and connection string tests.

Author: Done

Drives MUST support device workflows for "aws", "azure", and "gcp", given
by the DEVICE_NAME mechanism property.  In all cases the acquired token
will be given as the ``jwt`` argument in the second client step of the
SASL exchange.

AWS
___

When the DEVICE_NAME mechanism property is set to "aws", the driver MUST
attempt to read the value given by the ``AWS_WEB_IDENTITY_TOKEN_FILE`` and
interpret it as a file path.  The contents of the file are read as the
access token.

Azure
_____

When the DEVICE_NAME mechanism property is set to "azure", the driver MUST
acquire an access token using the workflow described in "Obtaining an Access Token for Azure Key Vault" <TODO insert link to client-side-encryption>.

GCP
___

When the DEVICE_NAME mechanism property is set to "gcp", the driver MUST
acquire an access token using the workflow described in "Obtaining GCP Credentials" <TODO insert link to client-side-encryption>.

Caching Credentials
```````````````````

Drivers MUST enable caching when callback(s) are provided to the mongo client.
When an authorization request is made and there is a valid cached response,
the driver MUST use the cached response if it has not expired.

> The cached responses are tied to the principal name if given, and an id of the callback function, if possible in the driver's language.

Reviewer 3: Maybe I’m misunderstanding this, but:

I assume that this cache is implemented on a per-MongoClient basis. Would it be possible to change the callback function after a client has been instantiated? Otherwise I’m not quite sure what the purpose of including the id of the callback is.

Author: No, the cache is meant to be global, where the keys are some combination of the principal name and the callback hash.  We could clarify that if a per-client cache is used, then the only key needs to be the principal name.

Reviewer 3: I’d add a clarifying note about that here, yes :slightly_smiling_face:

Author: Done!

acquire an access token using the workflow described in "Obtaining an Access Token for Azure Key Vault" <TODO insert link to client-side-encryption>.

GCP
___

When the DEVICE_NAME mechanism property is set to "gcp", the driver MUST
acquire an access token using the workflow described in "Obtaining GCP Credentials" <TODO insert link to client-side-encryption>.

Caching Credentials
```````````````````

Drivers MUST enable caching when callback(s) are provided to the mongo client.
When an authorization request is made and there is a valid cached response,
the driver MUST use the cached response if it has not expired.

The driver MAY, if it has previously acquired a valid Access Token, or has cached the reply from serverStep1, begin their authentication by sending clientStep2 with their initial saslStart request and authenticate in a single round trip.

If the driver implements a global cache, the cache keys MUST include the
principal name if given, and a hash of the callback function, if possible
in the driver's language.  A global cache should be preferred, to prevent
multiple browser interactions in the case of an authentication code

> workflow.

Reviewer 3: Two things:

- In the devtools products, we won’t really be able to make use of this feature since we’ll need to maintain a cache across MongoClient instances in different processes. I could imagine that other products, if there are any, that use browser flows, would run into similar issues at some point. Consequently, I don’t know if adding global mutable state is worth it here – definitely not a blocker though!
- The cache key should probably include some form of cluster identifier, since the principal name may refer to different things for different clusters. Right now, on our side we’re planning to use the `client_id` provided in the initial SASL response for this.

Author: If we rely on a value from server step 1, we cannot skip client step 1 on subsequent calls.

Reviewer 2: >The cache key should probably include some form of cluster identifier, since the principal name may refer to different things for different clusters. Right now, on our side we’re planning to use the client_id provided in the initial SASL response for this.

@addaleax , if we need to determine what cluster provided a cached value, is it easier to add a host name to a cache key instead tracking a client_id? It would be good to build a cache key based on initial client configuration and not on something dynamic. Also it will allow skipping step 1.

Reviewer 3: Right, that’s a good point – I don’t mind using the host address as a key here if that’s easy enough. I’m not sure how common it would be to use the same client id for multiple clusters anyway.

Author: Updated

.. code:: typescript

    function onOIDCRefreshToken(serverInfo: OIDCMechanismServerStep1, tokenResult: OIDCRequestTokenResult): OIDCRequestTokenResult

If the callback does not return an object in the correct form of ``OIDCRequestTokenResult``, the driver MUST raise an error.

If the refresh callback is given and the request callback is not given,
the driver MUST raise an error.  If DEVICE_NAME is given and one or more
callbacks are given, the driver MUST raise an error.

If no callbacks are given, the driver MUST enforce that a DEVICE_NAME
mechanism_properties is set and one of ("aws", "azure", or "gcp").
The callback mechanism can be used to support both Authentication
Code Workflows or Device workflows that are not explicitly implemented
by drivers.  If there is no callback and no DEVICE_NAME, or the
DEVICE_NAME is set but credentials cannot be automatically obtained,
the driver MUST raise an error.

Supported Device Workflows
``````````````````````````

Drives MUST support device workflows for "aws", "azure", and "gcp", given
by the DEVICE_NAME mechanism property.  In all cases the acquired token

> will be given as the ``jwt`` argument and the second client step of the

Reviewer 2: as we discussed, the second client step in this wording means `saslStart`, not `saslContinue` (which is second step regularly). Can we describe this a bit more clear?

Author: Done

OIDC SASL exchange MUST be made directly, skipping the clientStep1.
Drivers MUST raise an error if both a DEVICE_NAME and PRINCIPAL_NAME are
given, since the device workflow will not use the PRINCIPAL_NAME.

AWS
___

When the DEVICE_NAME mechanism property is set to "aws", the driver MUST
attempt to read the value given by the ``AWS_WEB_IDENTITY_TOKEN_FILE`` and
interpret it as a file path.  The contents of the file are read as the
access token.

Azure
_____

> When the DEVICE_NAME mechanism property is set to "azure", the driver MUST

Reviewer 2: I think we need to clear cache (inside azure) too in case of failure?

Author: Done

          expiresInSeconds:
              description: "The expiration time in seconds from the current time"
              type: int
              optional: true
          refreshToken:
              description: "The OIDC refresh token"
              type: str
              optional: true

.. code:: typescript

    function onOIDCRequestToken(serverInfo: OIDCMechanismServerStep1): OIDCRequestTokenResult

Callbacks can be synchronous and/or asynchronous, depending on the driver
and/or language.  Asynchronous callbacks should be preferred when other
operations in the driver use asynchronous functions.

Before calling a callback, the driver MUST acquire a lock, and verify that
there are no valid cache credentials before calling the callback.
This is because request callbacks may involve human interaction, and refresh
callbacks could use refresh tokens that can only be used once.

The driver MUST provide a way for the callback to be either automatically
cancelled, or to cancel itself.  This can be as a timeout argument to the
callback, a cancellation context passed to the callback, or some other
language-appropriate mechanism.  The timeout MUST respect the client side

> operation timeout if set, or 60 seconds.

Reviewer 3: Does this mean that there is a hard limit of 60 seconds or CSOT for completing authentication? That seems a bit restrictive for human flows (think 2FA codes taking a while to propagate etc.)

Author: I agree.  The user might also have to manually retrieve a password from a vault, etc.  The question is then whether we want to impose any time limit on this.  Perhaps 5 minutes?

Reviewer 3: I’d expect any time limit to be configured by the callback itself. 5 minutes seems like it should be enough for human flows and I’d definitely be okay with using that here, I’m just wondering if the driver is really the right place to enforce a limit.

Reviewer 2: I would say differently. On the driver side, are we ok with possibly infinite waiting under lock? Since user interaction can potentially take any time. I would say not relly

Author: I agree, even if the driver is multi-threaded, we still do not want to have an orphaned thread.  I've updated this section.

In the case of authorization failure, the cache used for azure credentials
MUST be cleared.

GCP
___

When the DEVICE_NAME mechanism property is set to "gcp", the driver MUST
acquire an access token using the workflow described in "Obtaining GCP Credentials" <TODO insert link to client-side-encryption>.

Caching Credentials
```````````````````

Drivers MUST enable caching when callback(s) are provided to the mongo client.
When an authorization request is made and there is a valid cached response,
the driver MUST use the cached authorization token if it has not expired.

A cache value is considered valid if it has been created in the past 5 hours.
The cache is kept alive to preserve the serverStep1 response, as well as
account for refresh tokens, which typically have an (unknown) lifetime that
is longer than the access token lifetime.  The refresh token may either be
stored by the user application, or as part of the request/refresh token
response in the driver cache. To prevent a memory leak, the driver MUST clear
invalid cache values at a regular interval, or during every authentication
attempt.

The cache keys MUST include the principal name (or empty string) and the

> resolved host name for the current server.  Using the resolved host name

Reviewer 3: This should clarify what “resolved host name” means specifically (or link to some definition if this is a common term in driver specs) … the text below makes it sounds like it’s the hostname of the primary for replica sets?

Author: Updated to "DNS resolved name".

Reviewer 3: It’s honestly still not really clear what this means… Does this mean the server’s IP address? Is the cache for a single endpoint, or for an entire replicaset? Does “DNS resolved” mean CNAME resolution? Does it include port information? etc.

A cache value is considered valid if it has been created in the past 5 hours.
The cache is kept alive to preserve the serverStep1 response, as well as
account for refresh tokens, which typically have an (unknown) lifetime that
is longer than the access token lifetime.  The refresh token may either be
stored by the user application, or as part of the request/refresh token
response in the driver cache. To prevent a memory leak, the driver MUST clear
invalid cache values at a regular interval, or during every authentication
attempt.

The cache keys MUST include the principal name (or empty string) and the
IP address and port for the current server's endpoint.  Using the IP address and port accounts for the case when two different servers use the same
principal name but could be configurated differently.  There is an edge case
where if the same principal name is used and two aliases to the same local
host address are given, there will be duplicate user/device interactions,
unless the driver can resolve the local host address as well.  Note that
because we use the current host name, changing the primary host on a replica

> set will result in a cache miss.

Reviewer 3: Does this still apply? If the cache is based on the server IP address, then it will have different entries for all RS members.

Author: I'll rephrase it, that is what I was trying to convey.

.. note::
    Five minutes was chosen based on the AWS documentation for `IAM roles for EC2 <https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/iam-roles-for-amazon-ec2.html>`_ : "We make new credentials available at least five minutes before the expiration of the old credentials". The intent is to have some buffer between when the driver fetches the credentials and when the server verifies them.

MONGODB-OIDC
~~~~~~~~~~~~

:since: 7.0 Enterprise

MONGODB-OIDC authenticates using an `OIDC <https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html>`_ access tokens.  Drivers MUST support

> both the Authentication Code Flow and Device Workflow for AWS, Azure,

Reviewer 3: This sounds a bit like drivers would need to implement Authentication Code Flow out of the box, when in reality that’s left to user-provided callbacks (which may be populated with example code for ACF) – maybe this could be reworded to clarify this?

Author: Good catch, updated

When an authorization request is made and there is a valid cached response,
the driver MUST use the cached authorization token if it has not expired.

A cache value is considered valid if it has been created in the past 5 hours.
The cache is kept alive to preserve the serverStep1 response, as well as
account for refresh tokens, which typically have an (unknown) lifetime that
is longer than the access token lifetime.  The refresh token may either be
stored by the user application, or as part of the request/refresh token
response in the driver cache. To prevent a memory leak, the driver MUST clear
invalid cache values at a regular interval, or during every authentication
attempt.

The cache keys MUST include the username (or empty string) and the
actually used socket address and port for the current server.
Using the socket address and port accounts for the case when two different
servers use the same username but could be configurated differently.
There is an edge case where if the same username is used and two aliases
to the same local host address are given, there will be duplicate user/device
interactions, unless the driver can resolve the local host address as well.

> Note thatbecause we use the server socket address, there will different cache

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that because we use the server socket address, there will different cache
```

keys for each member of a replica set.

The driver MUST cache the serverStep1 reponse as part of the cache value,
to enable skipping serverStep1 on subsequent authentications of the same
cache key.

A global cache should be preferred, to prevent multiple browser interactions
in the case of an authentication code workflow.  However, drivers or dev tools
can choose to use their own caching scheme if appropriate for their language/
environment.

> A cached value will expire within 5 minutes of the ``expiresInSeconds`` time.

Reviewer 3: I assume “within 5 minutes” means “5 minutes _before_ `expiresInSeconds` will be reached”, not “after”, but it might be good to make this wording unambiguous?

What happens if the callback returns an `expiresInSeconds` value that is less than 5 minutes? (If that means not caching the result, then that would be very nice for us in devtools as a way of disabling the cache, but I’m not sure if that’s really what would be most desirable in the big picture.)

Author: I clarified the paragraph.

        "onOIDCRefreshToken" (defined below), if the driver supports
        providing objects as mechanism property values.

Drivers MUST skip client step 1 for device workflows
or when the server step 1 response value is cached.  When skipping step 1,
drivers will use ``saslStart`` and a payload with the ``jwt`` value.

User Provided Callbacks
```````````````````````

Drivers MUST allow the user to provide callbacks for token request and
token refresh.  The token request callback MUST accept the OIDCMechanismServerStep1 structure and return an OIDCRequestTokenResult of
the form:

.. code:: idl

  OIDCRequestTokenResult:
      description: "The result of a token request"
      strict: false
      fields:
          accessToken:
              description: "The OIDC access token"
              type: string
          expiresInSeconds:
              description: "The expiration time in seconds from the current time"
              type: int
              optional: true
          refreshToken:
              description: "The OIDC refresh token"
              type: str
              optional: true

.. code:: typescript

>     function onOIDCRequestToken(serverInfo: OIDCMechanismServerStep1, timeoutSeconds: int): OIDCRequestTokenResult

Reviewer 3: Would it be possible to add the principal name as an argument to these (or at least the request callback here)? I think that’s actually a requirement on our side to understand whether an OIDC auth attempt for different `MongoClient`s happens for the same user or not.

Author: Done
